On January 1 , 1533 , Michael Angelo, then fifty-seven years old, writes
art of navigating the sea of your potent genius, that genius will
alone in everything can in nothing find its counterpart. Wherefore your
hand. If, therefore, this or that in the works which I hope and promise
been reported to me--I have given your lordship satisfaction in one
unable to recall the past, in order to serve you so much the longer,
not my letter, for my pen cannot approach the expression of my good
Cavalieri writes to Michael Angelo that he regards himself as born
earth, if your letters had not brought me the persuasion that your
Messer Tommaso, with the words: "I believe _I should instantly fall
Michael Angelo plays upon his friend's surname as Shakespeare plays

    Resto prigion d'un _Cavalier_ armato."
     No marvel if alone and bare I go


     The flames of holy worship, nor denies
     Let time stand still, and let noon's chariot stay;
     Clasp in these yearning arms and keep for aye

that Shakespeare was not really old at the time when the Sonnets were
eighteen, Shakespeare was in effect old, with his sixteen additional
then reached the age of thirty-seven, an age at which (among his
aptly pointed out, Byron in his swan-song uses expressions about

     Upon those boughs which shake against the cold
Byron thus expresses himself:--
       The flowers and fruits of love are gone,

    "In me thou seest _the glowing of such fire_
     Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by."

     No torch is kindled at its blaze--
Thus both poets liken themselves, at this comparatively early age, to
glows in their soul to a solitary flame which finds no nourishment from

verbal identity with a passage in Sidney's _Arcadia_--that they are
In short, the elements of temporary fashion and convention which appear

towards self-surrender in love and idolatry, and with a corresponding,
We learn from the Sonnets to what a degree Shakespeare was oppressed
ancient Judea for whoever disguised himself in the garments of the
of thought had been handed down from generation to generation, and, as
as Shakespeare's could not but suffer keenly. He was not regarded as
had no civic status. Hence his complaint, in Sonnet xxix., of being "in
their friendship:--
     Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame:
     But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
The bitter complaint in Sonnet lxxii. seems rather to refer to the



     Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
     Askance and strangely; but, by all above,

breeds":--
     And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
We must bear in mind this continual writhing under the prejudice
classes, if we would understand the high pressure of Shakespeare's
of the young for intellectual superiority. William Herbert, with his
was cast. He was a living witness to the fact that Shakespeare was not
and almost passionate friendship which placed him on an equal footing
It is very probable, too, that the young aristocrat, according to the
painful the situation in which he was placed by the intrigue between
In any case, the affection with which Pembroke inspired
but an erotic fervour such as we never find in our century manifested
    "Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
This exactly corresponds to Michael Angelo's recently-quoted desire to

We have here an exact counterpart to the following expressions in a
body alone, than your name, which sustains both body and soul, filling

on the part of the elder friend towards the younger, which, in these
strange it seems to find Shakespeare calling himself young Herbert's
him wait or summon him to his side as his caprice and fancy dictate.

     I have no precious time at all to spend,
     Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
     Nor dare I question with my jealous thought,
     Save, where you are how happy you make those."
they were scarcely worth his friend's notice, so does Shakespeare

     Exceeded by the height of happier men."
between the friends. Shakespeare then repeatedly promises so to blacken

     Of faults concealed wherein I am attainted,
Sonnet lxxxix. is still more strongly worded:--
     To set a form upon desired change,
     Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
     And haply of our old acquaintance tell.

beyond the first half of the Sonnet; in the second half this self-love
Sonnets (lv. and lxxxi.) in which the poet confidently predicts the
and it is simply as records of his friend's beauty and amiability that
these lines in Sonnet lv.:--
